---
date: Fall 2019

title: Professional Responsibility
subtitle: Law Firms

author: Eric M. Fink
affiliation: Elon Law School 

output: 
  pdf_document:
    latex_engine: xelatex
    template: classnotes.latex
    
---

## Sale of a Law Firm

Rule 1.17
A lawyer or a law firm may sell or purchase a law practice, or an area of law practice, including good will, if the following conditions are satisfied:
(a) The seller ceases to engage in the private practice of law, or in the area of practice that has been sold, [in the geographic area] [in the jurisdiction] (a jurisdiction may elect either version) in which the practice has been conducted;
(b) The entire practice, or the entire area of practice, is sold to one or more lawyers or law firms;
(c) The seller gives written notice to each of the seller's clients regarding:
(1) the proposed sale;
(2) the client's right to retain other counsel or to take possession of the file; and
(3) the fact that the client's consent to the transfer of the client's files will be presumed if the client does not take any action or does not otherwise object within ninety (90) days of receipt of the notice.
If a client cannot be given notice, the representation of that client may be transferred to the purchaser only upon entry of an order so authorizing by a court having jurisdiction. The seller may disclose to the court in camera information relating to the representation only to the extent necessary to obtain an order authorizing the transfer of a file.
(d) The fees charged clients shall not be increased by reason of the sale.
Problem
	The ABC law firm’s estate planning department has been losing money for years.  Consequently, ABC decides to sell its entire estate planning practice—including all estate planning clients—to XYZ law firm, which specializes in estate planning.  What duties do ABC owe to its estate planning clients?
May ABC sell only those clients with assets below $1 million?
May XYZ defray the acquisition costs by raising fees on clients it receives from ABC?

Rule 2.1
In representing a client, a lawyer shall exercise independent professional judgment and render candid advice. In rendering advice, a lawyer may refer not only to law but to other considerations such as moral, economic, social and political factors, that may be relevant to the client's situation.

Problem
Lawyer represents ABC Corp.  ABC has a very good breach of contract action against one of its regular customers, XYZ Corp.  ABC hires Lawyer to sue XYZ.  Lawyer advises ABC’s president that, “although you have a great lawsuit and I’m prepared to file the complaint, I do not think it is a wise business decision for you to sue a regular customer?”  Did Lawyer act properly?

Problem
Lawyer represents A in a child custody dispute.  A is the custodial parent of three children.  A’s former spouse, B, has filed the child custody suit in an attempt to obtain custody of the children.  A is a heavy drinker and has had considerable difficulty raising the children.  Lawyer advises A:  “I think you should seek treatment for your drinking and attend some parenting classes.”  Did Lawyer act properly?

Rule 2.3
(a) A lawyer may provide an evaluation of a matter affecting a client for the use of someone other than the client if the lawyer reasonably believes that making the evaluation is compatible with other aspects of the lawyer's relationship with the client.
(b) When the lawyer knows or reasonably should know that the evaluation is likely to affect the client's interests materially and adversely, the lawyer shall not provide the evaluation unless the client gives informed consent.
(c) Except as disclosure is authorized in connection with a report of an evaluation, information relating to the evaluation is otherwise protected by Rule 1.6.
Problem
Lawyer, a partner in the Smith Law Firm, represents ABC Corp. in tax matters.  ABC works with other companies (“customers”) to reduce their income tax exposure.  ABC has created a new type of transaction which purportedly has significant tax advantages.  ABC would like to market this new transaction to its customers.  In order to make the new transaction more appealing to customers, ABC has asked Lawyer to prepare an opinion letter in which Lawyer opines on the tax advantages.  ABC will give this opinion letter to customers and potential customers.  May Lawyer prepare the opinion letter?

What should Lawyer do if she disagrees with ABC as to the tax advantages of the new transaction?


