---
date: 2020-05-27T23:00:00

course: Professional Responsibility
title: "Review Questions: Government Lawyers 
author: Eric M. Fink

    
---

﻿## Special Issues for Government Lawyers

1. Conflicts when a lawyer moves from the government to private practice
a) lawyer who leaves government employment (as a lawyer or otherwise) shall not represent a private client in connection with a matter on which the lawyer participated personally and substantially at the government, unless the government agency gives informed consent.
(1) Example: 
(a) L works as a lawyer for the IRS. While with the government, L reviews X’s tax file for purposes of preparing a Private Letter Ruling. The PLR denied X’s request for a tax deduction. L leaves the government and joins the Smith Law Firm. X asks L to represent him in court in an action against the IRS related to the same deduction issue. L is prohibited from representing X (unless the IRS consents) because L personally and substantially participated in X’s matter as a government employee.
(b) Same facts, but Y asks L to represent Y in a lawsuit against the IRS. Although Y’s dispute with the IRS existed at the time L was employed by the government, L played no role in the matter and has no confidential government information about Y. L may represent Y.
b) Imputed Disqualification: Even if the former government lawyer is disqualified, this conflict is not imputed to the lawyer’s firm, if the following conditions are satisfied:
(1) The lawyer is screened from any participation in the matter, 
(2) The lawyer receives no share any part of the fee from the representation (although a partner can continue to share in overall partnership profits from an existing partnership agreement, which may include such fee), and
(3) Prompt written notice is given to the agency.
2. Conflicts when a lawyer moves from the government to private practice
a) A former government lawyer who has confidential government information (i.e., information the government is prohibited by law from disclosing or has a legal privilege not to disclose to the public) about a person may not represent a private client whose interests are adverse to that person in a matter in which the confidential government information could be used to the disadvantage of that person.
(1) Example: L works for the IRS. While employed by the government, L works on X’s tax file. During this work, L learns that X makes most of his money selling fraudulent securities. This is confidential IRS information (i.e., the IRS is prohibited by law from disclosing this information to the public). L leaves the IRS and joins the Smith Law Firm. Y asks L to represent Y in a fraud suit against X. L cannot undertake such representation if she has confidential government information (which appears so) about X and this information could be used to the disadvantage of X in Y’s suit against X
b) Imputed Disqualification—The remaining lawyers at the Smith Law Firm, are not disqualified from representing Y in the case of X v. Y, if:
(1) L is screened from participation in the case, and 
(2) L is apportioned no part of the fee from that representation. 
3. Conflicts when a lawyer moves from private practice to the government
a) A lawyer who participated personally and substantially in a matter while in private practice shall not work on the matter as a government official (lawyer or otherwise), unless, under law, the lawyer is the only official authorized to so act (this exception is quite rare)
4. Government lawyers (including judges, arbitrators, mediators and third-party neutrals) negotiating private employment
a) A government lawyer (including a judge, arbitrator, mediator, or third-party neutral) shall not negotiate private employment with any person involved as a party or lawyer in a matter in which the government lawyer (including a judge, arbitrator, mediator or third-party neutral) is participating personally and substantially
(1) Examples: 
(a) L is an attorney for the IRS. While handling a case against XYZ Corp., L is asked to join XYZ’s legal department. L begins negotiating for the job while the case is pending. This is improper.
(b) J is a judge presiding over the case of X v. Y. Y is represented by the Smith Law Firm. J cannot negotiate private employment with X, Y, or the Smith Law Firm while the matter is pending before J.
5. Law clerks
a) A judge’s law clerk may negotiate with any party or firm if he or she so notifies the judge
(1) Example: L is a clerk for Judge J. Judge J is presiding over a major trial in which X is the defendant. X is represented by the Smith Law Firm. L has been actively involved in the case as a clerk. L may negotiate with the Smith Law Firm for private employment if L notifies J of this fact
b) A law clerk may not represent a party in a matter substantially related to a case on which she was involved as a clerk
(1) Example: While a federal clerk, L works on an antitrust class action. The case settled. L, now in private practice, is disqualified from representing a party on a claim alleging breach of the settlement agreement. But conflict is not imputed to L’s firm. Monument Builders of Pennsylvania, Inc. v. Catholic Cemeteries Assn., 190 FRD 164 (E.D. Pa. 1999) (citing Pa. Rule 1.12(a) regarding conduct of former judges and clerks). 
6. Problems:
a) While Attorney worked for the EPA, she spent most of her time in the preparation, trial, and appeal of a case involving the illegal discharge of toxic chemicals in 1999 by Deftco. Deftco was found liable and paid a $1 million fine. Thereafter, Attorney left the EPA and joined the Smith Law Firm. While at the Smith Law Firm, B asks Attorney to represent him in an action against Deftco, in which B alleges property damage related to Deftco’s 1999 toxic discharge. 
(1) May Attorney represent B?
(2) May Attorney represent Deftco?
(3) If not, may another lawyer in the Smith Law Firm represent B or Deftco? 
b) Attorney Alpha was employed as an assistant prosecutor during the time D was being investigated. Alpha played no role in the investigation and had no knowledge of facts other than those disclosed in the press. Two months ago, Alpha left the prosecutor’s office and formed a partnership with Attorney Beta. Last week, D asked Alpha to represent him.
(1) May Alpha represent D?
(2) If not, may Beta represent D?
c) As an assistant prosecutor, Attorney represented the state in a criminal non-support action against Husband. Husband received 60 days in jail and was ordered to pay a fine. After leaving the prosecutor’s office, Husband’s spouse, Wife, asked Attorney to represent her in a suit against Husband to collect the past-due child support that was at issue in the criminal case.
(1) May Attorney represent Wife?
(2) If not, may another lawyer in Attorney’s firm represent Wife?
d) While Attorney worked for the IRS, he learned that B owned substantial assets in Japan. Under federal law, this information is confidential and may not be disclosed outside the IRS. Attorney later left the IRS and joined the Smith Law Firm. C has asked Attorney to represent him in an action to collect a $1 million judgment from B. Thus far, C has been unable to locate any assets owned by B. 
(1) May Attorney represent C?
(2) If not, may another lawyer in the Smith Law Firm represent C?
e) While a partner at the Jones Law Firm, Lawyer represented A in civil suit filed by the SEC against A. While the litigation was still pending, Lawyer joined the SEC’s legal staff. 
(1) May Lawyer represent the SEC in its suit against A?
(2) May the other lawyers at the SEC continue to represent the agency in its suit against A?
f) Lawyer is an attorney for the FDA. While working on the application for approval of a new drug manufactured by Pharmco, Pharmco’s General Counsel asks Lawyer if she would be interested in joining Pharmco’s legal staff. 
(1) May Lawyer discuss such employment opportunities?
(2) What if Pharmco’s outside lawyers had asked Lawyer if she were interested in joining their firm?
g) Altman, a lawyer for the SEC, supervised an investigation and litigation against certain defendants, including McAlpin. The SEC litigation alleged that McAlpin and others looted millions of dollars from Capital Growth companies. McAlpin and other defendants defaulted, and the court appointed Armstrong as receiver for Capital Growth, to recover all misappropriated property. Armstrong hired the Gordon Hurwitz firm as receiver’s counsel. Altman, who had left the SEC, was now associated with Gordon Hurwitz. 
(1) May Altman represent Armstrong as the receiver for Capital Growth? Yes, unless SEC gives informed consent. But SEC may not consent if Altman has confidential government information about a person that could be used in the representation of a private client whose interests are adverse to that person. 
(2) Assuming Altman is disqualified, is the disqualification imputed to Gordon Hurwitz? No, the firm may represent the receiver, provided Altman is adequately screened
h) Prior to his election as City Attorney, Herrera represented Cobra Solutions, Inc. in various matters, including dealings with the City. Following an investigation, which began under the direction of Herrera’s predecessor in office, the City sued Cobra for fraud in connection with a city contract. 
(1) Is Herrera disqualified from representing the City in the suit against Cobra? Yes, based on the duties of confidentiality and loyalty, because the suit was substantially related to the subject of Herrera’s prior representation of Cobra
(2) Is the disqualification imputed to the rest of the City Attorney’s office? Yes. “Public perception that a city attorney and his deputies might be influenced by the city attorney’s previous representations of the client, at the expense of the best interests of the city, would insidiously undermine public confidence in the integrity of municipal government and its city attorney’s office.”
C. Special Responsibilities of Prosecutors
1. Rule 3.8
a) Refrain from prosecuting a charge unsupported by probable cause
b) Make reasonable efforts to assure that the accused
(1) has been advised of right to counsel
(2) has been advices of procedure for obtaining counsel
(3) been given reasonable opportunity to obtain counsel
c) Not seek to obtain waiver of important pre-trial rights by unrepresented accused
d) make timely disclosure of exculpatory or mitigating evidence or information
e) not subpoena a lawyer in grand jury or other criminal proceeding to present evidence about past or present client, unless:
(1) information sought is not privileged
(2) evidence sought is essential to successful completion or ongoing investigation or prosecution
(3) there is no feasible alternative source for information
f) extrajudicial statements:
(1) refrain from making extrajudicial comments with substantial likelihood of heightening public condemnation of the accused
(2) exercise reasonable care to prevent employees or agents or prosecutor from making such statements
g) Newly discovered, credible, material evidence casting doubt on prior conviction:
(1) promptly disclose to appropriate court
(2) if conviction was obtained in prosecutor’s jurisdiction:
(a) promptly disclose evidence to defendant, unless court authorizes delay
(b) undertake, or cause, further investigation to determine whether convicted defendant was innocent
h) Seek to remedy conviction if prosecutor knows of clear and convincing evidence establishing innocence of defendant convicted in prosecutor’s jurisdiction
2. Problems
a) Deft, who has been indicted for auto theft, is represented by Attorney. Prosecutor reasonably believes that Deft committed the offense, but, because of Deft’s youth, it is in the interest of justice to permit Deft to plead guilty to the lesser offense of joy-riding in return for an agreement by Prosecutor to recommend probation. Prosecutor has so advised Attorney, but Attorney told Prosecutor that she would not plead guilty. Attorney informed Deft of Prosecutor’s offer and advised Deft not to accept it. Deft followed Attorney’s advice. Attorney is a candidate for public office, and Prosecutor suspects that Attorney is insisting on a trial of the case to secure publicity for herself. Which of the following would be proper for Prosecutor?
(1) Send a member of his staff who is not a lawyer to consult with Deft.
(2) Move the court to dismiss the indictment and accept a new complaint charging the offense of joy-riding.
(3) Proceed to trial on the indictment and prosecute the case vigorously.
b) A, B, and C are charged with raping X. Immediately after the alleged rape, X was treated at a local emergency room. While in the hospital, the nurse completed a “rape kit,” which included material that could be tested for DNA. When Prosecutor sent the rape kit to the lab for testing, the DNA of several men were found on the X’s body and undergarments. None of the DNA tests, however, matched A, B, or C. Despite requests by defense counsel, Prosecutor failed to disclose the DNA matches of the other men in the rape kit. Is Prosecutor subject to discipline?
c) Pros, an elected prosecutor, plans to run for reelection in 6 months. Last year two teenage girls were kidnapped from a shopping center and sexually assaulted. The community was in an uproar and demanded a conviction. Four months ago, Deft was arrested and charged with the crimes. The trial is scheduled for next week. Pros met with the police chief last week and learned for the first time that, before they were interviewed, the two victims had been tape-recorded discussing the case. Reviewing the tape, Pros realized that the girls’ descriptions of the assailant differed significantly. When officially interviewed, however, their descriptions matched perfectly. Deft’s counsel, who had the right to request access to the prosecution’s investigative file, failed to do so because of her busy schedule. Pros reasonably believes Deft committed the crimes, so Pros did not reveal the existence of the tape to defense counsel. 
(1) Is Pros subject to discipline?
(2) Is Deft’s counsel subject to discipline?
d) Pros, a prosecutor, was assigned to try a criminal case against Deft, who was charged with robbery of a convenience store. Deft denied any involvement, contending that he was home watching television with his mother on the night in question. At the trial, Wit, a customer at the convenience store, testified that he had identified Deft in a police line-up and provided other testimony connecting Deft to the crime. In addition, Pros entered into evidence a poor-quality videotape of the robbery as recorded by the store surveillance camera. The jury convicted Deft of the crime charged. Unknown to Deft’s court-appointed lawyer, Wit had first identified another person in the police line-up and selected Deft only after encouragement by the detective. Pros was aware of these facts but did not notify Deft’s counsel who made no pretrial discovery request to obtain this information. Is Pros subject to discipline?
(1) Yes, unless the jury could make its own identification of Deft from the videotape.
(2) Yes, because this information tended to negate Deft’s guilt.
(3) No, because Deft’s counsel made no pretrial discovery request to obtain this information.
(4) No, unless it is likely that the jury would have acquitted Deft had it known that Wit first identified someone else.
e) In 1995, D was convicted of armed robbery in Green County and sentenced to imprisonment for 10 years. In 1998, L is elected District Attorney for Green County. In 1990, L is presented with convincing evidence indicating that D was wrongfully convicted. L played no role in D’s conviction and, in fact, was in private practice in 1995. What are L’s ethical obligations?
D. Judicial officials, mediators, and third-party neutrals representing private clients
1. Rule 1.12
a) A judge, mediator, or third-party neutral shall not represent a client on a matter in which he or she participated personally and substantially as a judge, arbitrator, magistrate, law clerk, mediator, third-party neutral, etc., unless all of the parties to the matter give informed consent confirmed in writing
b) A judge does not participate “personally and substantially” in a matter simply because she holds an administrative position over the entire court (e.g., chief judge) or because she is one member of a court in which the action is pending (e.g., one of 11 judges on the Fourth Circuit). In other words, the judge is generally disqualified only if she presided over the case
c) Imputed Disqualification—The remaining members of the judge’s (or mediator’s or third-party neutral’s) law firm are not disqualified, if:
(1) The disqualified individual is screened from any participation in the matter, 
(2) The disqualified individual receives no part of the fee, and 
(3) Written notice is given to the parties and the appropriate tribunal.
d) A party-arbitrator (chosen by a party as “its” arbitrator) may represent that party in later proceedings in the same matter
2. Problem
a) Judge Beta is the Chief Judge of the County Court. As part of her job, Beta randomly assigns cases to the other seven county court judges. Beta randomly assigned the case of A v. B to Judge Alpha. Judge Alpha has presided over all proceedings in A v. B. Beta has played no role in the case other than the assignment. While the case of A v. B is still pending, Judges Alpha and Beta join the Smith Law Firm, which represents A. 
(1) May Judge Beta represent A in A v. B?
(2) May Judge Alpha represent A in A v. B?
(3) If not, may the Smith Law Firm continue to represent A?
(4) Was it proper for Judge Alpha to negotiate employment with the Smith Law Firm while A v. B was pending?
(5) Would it have been proper for Judge Alpha’s law clerk to negotiate employment with the Smith Law Firm while A v. B was pending? 
